---
title: "nsf grfp"
layout: post
date: 2019-08-08 00:00
tag:
  - nsf
headerImage: false
description: "Sharing my NSF GRFP"
category: blog
author: szoro
externalLink: true
math: false
---

Last spring I was awarded an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. Because these awards have seemingly far more to do with luck than skill, I think the best thing NSF recipients can do is share their proposals so that future applicants can have a little extra guidance in this most agonizing process.[^1]

So without further ado, the following are my NSF GRFP proposal and reviews:

- [Research Proposal](../assets/documents/grfp/szoro_nsf_grfp_research_proposal_FINAL.pdf)
- [Personal Statement](../assets/documents/grfp/szoro_nsf_grfp_personal_statement_FINAL.pdf)
- [Reviews](../assets/documents/grfp/szoro_nsf_grfp_reviews.pdf)

I'll also share three pieces of unsolicited advice for anyone interested -- though take them with a grain of salt, as you probably should with all NSF advice[^2]:

1. The NSF is not about funding an experiment; it's about investing in you as an aspiring scientist. Think about what you could offer the scientific community and public at large if the NSF were to invest in you.
2. Relatedly, your proposed experiments don't need to be groundbreaking but they should be well-motivated and clearly described.
3. The NSF is not the time to be humble. Flaunt your accomplishments. You're awesome; make sure your reviewers know it.

Finally and most importantly, though [Celia](https://twitter.com/cogcelia/status/1115622528955760640) and [Sara](https://twitter.com/sara_poppop/status/1115793159915618304) have said it better already, it bears repeating: **You are not your NSF. The NSF does not define your worth as a scientist or a person. You are brilliant, talented, and awesome.**

Best of luck, y'all.

---

[^1]: Seriously, how do you to fit an entire research proposal in two pages!?
[^2]: I was told several times that the NSF would find my proposal "too clinical" and never fund it ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯
