---
title: "Month of May, Paper a Day - Day 03"
layout: post
date: 2020-05-03 00:00
tag:
  - paper
headerImage: false
description: ""
category: blog
author: szoro
externalLink: true
math: false
---

Today I read [Smits et al. (2012)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3404225/), *Threat Reappraisal as a Mediator of Symptom Change in Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment of Anxiety Disorders: A Systematic Review*. This had been on my reading list for months, and I wish I had gotten to it sooner.

The authors begin by noting that though CBT is a widely successful treatment for anxiety, non-response rates and symptom recurrence following discontinuation remain frustratingly high (up to 50% in many instances). As such, the authors argue, there is need to augment CBT. Without knowing precisely the mechanisms by which CBT work, however, it is difficult to improve therapies. Thus, the authors investigate whether CBT is effective at reducing exaggerated appraisals of threat, which are (a) core to cognitive-behavioral accounts of anxiety disorders and (b) a primary target of many CBT interventions (e.g. psychoeducational: describing exaggerated threat appraisal as a source of anxiety; cognitive restructuring: identifying and correcting erroneous appraisals; behavioral: exposure to disconfirming evidence).

To investigate the efficacy of CBT in causing threat reappraisal and anxiety reduction, they adopt a mediation framework. Specifically, to establish a mediating relationship the authors require four pieces of evidence:

1. **Evidence for statistical mediation:** a reduction of the strength of the relation between CBT and anxiety symptom reduction after controlling for threat reappraisal
2. **Evidence that CBT causes threat reappraisal:** a demonstration that CBT specifically, as opposed to some other intervention (e.g. medication), reduces exaggerated threat appraisals.
3. **Evidence that threat reappraisal causes anxiety reduction:** a demonstration that threat reappraisal predicts *future* reductions in anxiety.
4. **Evidence for specificity:** Because treatment studies do not directly manipulate the mediator variable (just the independent variable; CBT), it is difficult to rule out third-variable explanations of the effect of the mediator variable (threat reappraisal) on the outcome variable (anxiety reduction) without controlling for plausible alternative mediators. Alternative mediators might include other cognitive appraisal measures not involving threat expectancies such as self-efficacy or fear expectancy.

The authors then identify and summarize 25 studies (N=1986) of CBT efficacy for anxiety disorders (predominantly panic disorder and social anxiety disorder) that report at least one of the four types of evidence above.

A summary of their findings is as follows:

1. Of 14 studies which investigated statistical meditation, 13 find evidence in support of CBT. (Interestingly, the 14th study found that *self-efficacy* but not threat appraisal accounted for symptom improvement.) 10 of the remaining studies reported evidence of relation between threat reappraisal and anxiety symptom severity reduction, but did not conduct a full mediation analysis.
2. Of 13 studies which manipulated CBT, seven studies demonstrated evidence for a causal relation between CBT and threat reappraisal. Importantly, the remaining 6 studies found that threat appraisal did change with CBT, but did not differ between CBT and a credible comparison condition pharmacotherapy, stress management, interpersonal therapy, breathing retraining), thus making it impossible to rule the possibility that this change was due to time or some other third variable (not involving CBT or treatment).
3. Of 7 studies which investigated whether threat reappraisal causes anxiety reduction, 6 demonstrated that threat reappraisal resulted in subsequent reductions in anxiety.
4. Of 11 studies which controlled for plausible alternative mediators, 9 observed significant relations between threat reappraisal and anxiety reduction after controlling for them (including self-efficacy, perceived control, partnership satisfaction, uncertainty intolerance, and perfectionism). Interestingly, 2 studies found that the relation between threat reappraisal and anxiety reduction was no longer significant after controlling for enhanced self-efficacy.

The authors conclude that the present evidence strongly validates the cognitive-behavioral model, i.e. that changes in cognitive appraisals and anxiety symptoms are in tandem. Moreover, there is credible evidence that threat reappraisal reduces anxiety symptoms, even after controlling for other appraisal measures (i.e. self-efficacy). In contrast, the evidence for the hypothesis that threat reappraisal specifically drives the efficacy of CBT for anxiety disorders was not strong. Thus, the authors continue, it is difficult to make a strong case for threat reappraisal as a singular target for augmenting CBT insofar that it is not apparent whether threat appraisal is a causative agent or merely a consequence of symptom change or a proxy for some other therapeutic change process.

One final conclusion the authors offer is to investigate moderators of treatment mechanisms, which may vary across patients. Because CBT offers a plethora of interventions, the authors note it is worth investigating whether and why certain individuals may respond better to particular interventions over
others (e.g. (cognitive restructuring vs. behavioral).

#### Appendix
Hoffman et al. (2018), *Cognitive Mediation of Symptom Change in Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy*, offer a follow up to Smits et al. (2012). Specifically, they address each anxiety disorder separately so as to compensate for the overrepresentation of panic disorder and social anxiety disorder in the original review.  

- Panic disorder: although there is robust evidence for changes in self-efficacy and threat reappraisal causing reductions in anxiety symptoms, less evidence exists demonstrating that CBT leads to greater cognitive change than other interventions.
- Social anxiety disorder: there is robust evidence that changes in the perceived likelihood and cost of social blunders predicts reductions in anxious symptoms, and that CBT is effective in changing such beliefs. Few studies of temporal precedence are available.
- Generalized anxiety disorder: preliminary evidence that worry-related processes and intolerance of uncertainty may be mediators of symptom reduction in CBT, but more studies required.
- Post-traumatic stress disorder: substantial evidence for cognitive mediation hypothesis in PTSD treatment, but few studies have involved alternative mediators so as to establish specificity.
- Obsessive-compulsive disorder: limited support for the cognitive mediation hypothesis in OCD.
