---
title: "Month of May, Paper a Day - Day 04"
layout: post
date: 2020-05-04 00:00
tag:
  - paper
headerImage: false
description: ""
category: blog
author: szoro
externalLink: true
math: false
---

Today I read [De Houwer (2020)](https://www.collabra.org/articles/10.1525/collabra.239/), *Conditioning is More Than Association Formation:
On the Different Ways in Which Conditioning Research is Valuable for Clinical Psychology*. I wanted to read this paper to get a better sense of the contrasts between reinforcement learning theories and propositional belief theories.

As the title would suggest, much of the paper concerns itself with the differences between associationist and propositional accounts of conditioning. The associationist view of fear conditioning is something like, "an agent fears X because an agent has associations (i.e. links) in memory between the representation of X and the representation of Y, an aversive stimulus, whose activation can spread to the former." Importantly in the associationist view, fear extinction (i.e. exposure therapy) works, not by the elimination of old excitatory associations, but the formation of novel inhibitory associations between X and Y.

In contrast, the propositional belief view is that, whereas associations in memory are merely links between representations, propositions are beliefs in a cognitive sense, i.e. mental representations of statements about events in the world. Statements are inherently relational such that they always relate one thing to another thing (e.g., "X is Y", "X co-occurs with Y", "X causes Y").

At first, the distinction between these two accounts seems inconsequential -- both equally account for how an agent may come to expect Y given X. Importantly, propositional beliefs have three important advantages for clinical psychology:

1. Only propositions can differentiate between forms of association, i.e. "X co-occurs with Y" v.s. "X causes Y". Though such a distinction may be arbitrary under simplified models, it may be crucial in a therapeutic setting.
2. Propositional belief theory allows for how new beliefs (as opposed to only experiences) may update associations.
3. Propositional belief theory accommodates additional modes of learning without experience (e.g. verbal information, social observation).

One major limitation of the propositional belief account is that it has little to say about when and how beliefs influence behavior. For instance, propositional models as such do not specify why certain beliefs influence behavior in a particular way, nor do they explain why beliefs sometimes have no behavioral effects.

In summary, propositional belief theory has a number of appealing features: it is more naturally aligned with cognitive-behavioral approaches to therapy, and mirrors more close what is observed in the clinic. That said, I come away with at least two major questions:

1. Does propositional belief theory ever make different learning predictions than other theories of learning and behavioral (e.g. reinforcement learning)? Theoretically, reinforcement learning can accommodate alternate forms of learning by treating verbal information or social observation as "experiences" to be evaluated. Are there important scenarios where *causal beliefs* predict different behaviors than mere associations?
2. What does a propositional belief research program look like? One nice feature of reinforcement learning is that it allows one to extract away much of the detail of the real world. By putting beliefs at the forefront, we must specify the nature of propositional models before predicting how an agent might update it or act on it.

Three good follow-up papers would be:
- [Lagnado et al., 2007](https://doi.org/10.1093/acpro f:oso/9780195176803.003.0011)
- [Mitchell, De Houwer, & Lovibond, 2009](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X09000855)
- [Lovibond, 2011](https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof: oso/9780199735969.003.0037)
