---
title: "Month of May, Paper a Day - Day 09"
layout: post
date: 2020-05-09 00:00
tag:
  - paper
headerImage: false
description: ""
category: blog
author: szoro
externalLink: true
math: false
---

Turns out a paper a day is difficult even with the best intentions. Life got in the way last week. Ok, another installment.

Today, I read [Katz et al. (2020)](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101842), *Reinforcement sensitivity, depression and anxiety: A meta-analysis and meta-analytic structural equation model*.

Historically, Gray’s Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST; [Gray & McNaughton, 2000](https://www.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198522713.001.0001)) has been a massively influential theory in cognitive, clinical, and personality psychology. In RST, animal behavior is governed by a behavioral approach system (BAS) -- controlling processes related to appetitive stimuli -- and an independent behavioral behavioral inhibition system (BIS) -- controlling processes related responses to aversive stimuli. When appetitive and aversive sensitivities are imbalanced, they are theorized to be risk factors for future psychopathology. For example, BAS hyposensitivity manifests as anhedonia and diminished approach motivation, and is implicated in depression. In contrast, BIS hypersensitivity is implicated in anxiety and manifests as increased apprehension in the face of impending negative outcomes and more intense reactivity to punishment.

Empirically, this clean division has been less consistently observed. Although there is ample evidence that BIS hypersensitivity is linked to anxiety, there also exists more heterogeneous evidence that it is also linked to depression (perhaps unsurprising given their large comorbidity). The present meta-analysis sought to summarize the existing evidence across all studies using the BIS/BAS questionnaire and any anxiety and/or depression symptom inventory.

The final sample included 260 samples from 204 articles. A summary of findings are below:

- A small negative relationship was observed between BAS and psychopathology across disorders, with substantial heterogeneity in findings. In contrast, a large positive relationship was observed between BIS and psychopathology, again with ample heterogeneity.
- A small negative relationship between BAS and depressive disorders was observed, and an even smaller (but significant) relationship was observed for anxiety disorders. BIS had a large positive relationship with depression and anxiety, which was larger for anxiety.
- A smaller secondary analysis of 39 samples (N=13,572) using SEM attempted to partial out the respective relationships between BIS/BAS, anxiety, and depression. The best fitting model found a weak but significant relationship between BAS and depression, moderate independent relationships between BIS and anxiety/depression, and substantial covariance between anxiety and depression symptoms.

The authors conclude that the results are consistent with models wherein a hypersensitive BIS predicts pathology in general, but a hyposensitive BAS makes the general pathology depressogenic. The authors go on to discuss some interesting theories about how hypersensitive BIS temperaments may give rise to psychopathology, but without longitudinal data this is hard to make sense of. Nevertheless, this article highlights the importance of the BIS for identifying and characterizing internalizing disorders.
