---
title: "Month of May, Paper a Day - Day 02"
layout: post
date: 2020-05-02 00:00
tag:
  - paper
headerImage: false
description: ""
category: blog
author: szoro
externalLink: true
math: false
---

Today I read [Caspi et al., 2020](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7175086/), *Longitudinal Assessment of Mental Health Disorders and Comorbidities Across 4 Decades Among Participants in the Dunedin Birth Cohort Study*.

In short, the authors summarize the pattern of psychiatric comorbidities in a sample of over 1000 citizens of a particular New Zealand province over four decades (1972 - 2019). The central result of the paper is not only that lifetime comorbidities in psychiatric diagnoses are the rule (i.e. an individual with one diagnosis at time 1 is likely to have another diagnosis at time 2), but also that comorbidities do not necessarily even stay within the same "diagnostic family" of disorders (i.e. internalizing, externalizing, thought disorders).

Some interesting findings:
1. Alarmingly, by age 45 years, 86% (869 of 1013) of the cohort cumulatively met the criteria for at least 1 disorder. In other words, experiencing at least one psychiatric disorder during one's lifetime is overwhelmingly the norm.
2. Participants characterized by only 1 pure disorder were atypical. Most individuals with one disorder experienced a second, frequently across diagnostic family lines (e.g. internalizing disorders frequently transitioned to externalizing disorders and vice-versa).
3. Corroborating previous findings, participants with a disorder in any of the 3 diagnostic families at 1 specific age were at higher risk for both other diagnostic families at subsequent ages, and all disorders were associated with an elevated risk for all other disorders.
4. Participants' age at the onset of a disorder, duration in terms of number of assessment ages with a disorder, and diversity of diagnoses were positively intercorrelated.
5. Children who grew up to score higher on the p-factor performed more poorly on neurocognitive examinations at age 3. Later in childhood, they had lower Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children–Revised IQ scores.

These are a very interesting and provocative set of findings, though not without limitations. Tracking over 1000 people over 40 years is without question an incredible feat, but issues of generalizability still remain. For example, the authors included alcohol-, tobacco-, and cannabis-dependence as externalizing disorders. Cultural factors influence the rate of diagnosis of these disorders, and may have some bearing cross-family comorbidity statistics. So too for ADHD, which was also classified (reasonably) as an externalizing disorder.

To the extent the results stand, however, they very much call into (further) question the study of specific disorders, as opposed to transdiagnostic dimensions. Beyond that though, this study seems to call into question studying transdiagnostic dimensions only within a single diagnostic family. That individuals transition between externalizing and internalizing disorders suggests we ought to put more thought into dimensions of behavior that can span the gap (e.g. risk sensitivity, approach/avoidance, perceived self-efficacy) and seek to understand how individuals can move between opposite sends of the spectrum.
